---
layout: post
title: "From the Atlantic to the Mediterranean"
date: 2021-03-31 12:00:00 +0200
permalink: ":title.html"

featured: false
tags:
author: "Manuel Sourdrille"
displayed_date: "March 31, 2021"
article_id: "article_2021-03-31"
collection_id: "northern_spain"

link_collection: bikepacking-northern-spain.html
active_collection: "Bikepacking Northern Spain"

statistics_duration: "8 days"
statistics_distance: "635 km"
statistics_ascent: "3,670 m"
statistics_surface: "13% unpaved"
statistics_highest_elevation: "450 m"
statistics_lowest_elevation: "0 m"

highlights_1_title: "The Canal du Midi"
highlights_1_description: "Originally named the Canal Royal en Languedoc, this canal is often regarded as one of the most remarkable construction works of the 17th century. Technically, its beginning aligns with the endpoint of the Canal de la Garonne. Stretching all the way from Toulouse to the Mediterranean Sea, the landscape's flora undergoes a transformation as one heads eastward, with the Pyrenees forming a captivating backdrop."
highlights_2_title: "Parc naturel régional Corbières-Fenouillèdes"
highlights_2_description: "Stretching between the l’Orbieu and La Têt rivers, you'll find 75 km of dirt paths and charming country roads that treat you to some stunning views. Head North, and you've got the Montagne Noire, showing off its highest peak – the Pic de Nore. Look to the South, and you'll catch sight of the Canigou, standing tall at 2,784 m. The flora here showcases Mediterranean characteristics – think garrigue, pine forests, and evergreen oaks."

img_thumbnail: /beneathopenskies/assets/img/col_northern-spain_article-2021-03-31_thumbnail.jpg
img_map: /beneathopenskies/assets/img/col_northern-spain_article-2021-03-31_map.jpg
img_bg: "article_2021-03-31"

imgcomp-4-land-port_img-1: /beneathopenskies/assets/img/20210323-130242.jpg
imgcomp-4-land-port_img-2: /beneathopenskies/assets/img/20210323-123030.jpg
imgcomp-4-land-port_img-3: /beneathopenskies/assets/img/20210323-160023.jpg
imgcomp-4-land-port_img-4: /beneathopenskies/assets/img/20210323-150631.jpg

imgcomp-2-land-n1_1: /beneathopenskies/assets/img/20210324-134323.jpg
imgcomp-2-land-n1_2: /beneathopenskies/assets/img/20210324-170545.jpg
---

Before reaching Toulouse, a significant portion of the route remained rather uneventful and less captivating: After departing from the Flow Vélo near Cognac and making my way towards Barbézieux, I continued my journey along the EV3 until I reached the Canal de la Garonne. It wasn't until Toulouse and the Canal du Midi that I noticed a shift in the scenery: The flora started undergoing a transformation, the Pyrenees loomed in the distance, and the paved paths transitioned into dirt trails. The final hundred kilometers or so within the Parc naturel régional Corbières-Fenouillèdes marked a striking change – they were considerably more engaging.

I slept well, but the night was short. I stayed at Laurent's place until 10 am. Then, I crossed Saintes and met up with France-Alexya in her apartment. I followed her recommendations and visited the main attractions, which were definitely worth the time. For a reason I can't quite explain, I found myself drawn to the architectural style of the region, which stands out distinctly from its surroundings. After wandering through the streets, I stopped by the supermarket to pick up some food before leaving town. I followed sections of the Flow Vélo route almost all the way to Cognac. The journey was enjoyable, the path was easy to navigate, and the scenery remained relatively diverse. Much of the day was spent tracing the course of various rivers.

Saintes is a historic town in western France, in Charente-Maritime.

The Flow Vélo is a 350 km itinerary going from Le Lardin-Saint-Lazare in Dordogne to l’île d’Aix in Charente-Maritime.

The final climb to Barbezieux proved to be rewarding. At the summit, a castle stands over the surrounding hills. I hadn't anticipated such a vantage point. While on the hunt for water and potential restrooms, I spotted a restaurant. A staff member was outside, and upon requesting water, he kindly provided me with both water and an unexpected invitation to dine for free. Although a pleasant offer, I declined and continued on my way. Reaching the greenway, I continued riding until I stumbled upon a grassy area equipped with tables and a small library. I set up camp, enjoyed a meal, and eventually gave my mom and dad a call. Surprisingly, I found myself enjoying the day far more than I had initially anticipated. The Charente region boasts numerous stunning manors and houses, along with captivating Roman churches. Despite the flat landscape, the area possesses an alluring and ever-changing beauty.

I was surprised to find that the tent was mostly dry. The branches of the tree above had shielded it from the dew despite the absence of leaves. Not too far away, the grass had a slight frosty touch. Although my hands and feet were cold, the situation wasn't as uncomfortable as I had anticipated. As the temperature gradually climbed, I purchased groceries and decided to switch into different clothes.

Today's route turned out to be mostly pleasant and easygoing. The initial stretch of the morning's _voie verte_ was nestled within the forest. Then, the scenery shifted to encompass pine trees, marking the transition to a hilly landscape. Eventually, the pines gave way to vineyards, creating an austere yet intriguing atmosphere. The numerous captivating manors dotted throughout the area more than made up for the starkness. The road leading to Saint-Emilion proved to be a bit treacherous due to heavy traffic and some recklessly speeding drivers. I didn't linger too long in the town, as I wasn't ready to navigate through the hords of tourists led by guides. Despite this, Saint-Emilion possessed an undeniable charm. The latter part of the ride offered respite from traffic, taking me through small hamlets and villages where, once again, exquisite houses lined the streets.

By the time I joined the _voie verte_ again, the day was waning, and I found myself slipping back into long sleeves as the temperature began to drop. Riding during dusk evoked a sense of tranquility, reminiscent of the previous evening. I paused to watch the sun set behind a distant hill, while below, a serene village was gently interrupted by the melodic ringing of the church bell. A bit further along, a beautiful house with an equally enchanting garden compelled me to stop and admire for a while. I encountered two fellow cyclists on the path, and they kindly offered me advice on potential camping spots. As it turns out, they were occasional bikepackers themselves. One of them even extended an invitation to stay at his place, had it not been quite a distance away. Pushing forward, I eventually stumbled upon the small park that had been mentioned on an information sign earlier. Despite being visible from nearby houses, I decided to set up camp there. Reflecting on my future, I contemplated the advantages of potentially having a home in France rather than Norway – a place with the benefits of friends, family, and language familiarity. Being a freelance could offer me the flexibility I desire, allowing me to work remotely while enjoying a more manageable workload than a traditional job.

Saint-Émilion is a UNESCO World Heritage Site located in Gironde and surrounded by vineyards. Romanesque churches and ruins stretch all along steep and narrow streets.

I was awakened before 6 am by a raven perched above my head. I stepped outside, shooed it away, and settled back in for more sleep. About an hour later, I packed up my gear, had breakfast, and set off under the overcast sky. Thankfully, the temperatures remained mild. Today's journey wasn't particularly eventful. I reached the Canal de la Garonne in the afternoon, a bit later than I had planned. While the route felt somewhat repetitive, the golden hour cast a lovely light that brightened things up. During the ride, I spotted two solo tourers and a pair riding together. I had a brief chat with the latter group. Toward the day's end, hills emerged on both sides of the path, adding a touch of variety. I exchanged words with a mountain biker and couldn't help but smile at his charming southern accent. I stumbled upon a nice spot on freshly cut grass beside the canal, facing a row of boats. Just before I settled into my tent, another cyclist struck up a conversation. He was curious and even offered to host me, but I had already unpacked and decided to decline his kind invitation. I was hoping for a peaceful night, though a mysterious machine in the fields had other ideas, making some noise. It's all part of the adventure, I suppose. Wrapping up the day, I enjoyed watching an episode of Friends – a fitting way to wind down and call it a night.

The air felt quite humid when I woke up. Much of the tent's outer fabric was damp. A light mist gently hung over the canal, creating a serene atmosphere where it seemed like the world was still in its slumber. I considered waiting for the sun to dry out the tent, but clouds soon rolled in to obscure it. It was around 8:30 when I finally hit the road. I spent most of the day pedaling, with the exception of a shopping break and a few quick stops here and there. Except for Agen and the quaint town of Moissac, the landscape was somewhat uneventful. By lunchtime, I had about 60 kilometers left to reach Loïc's place. I picked up the pace during the afternoon and realized that I'd be able to make it to Toulouse by the end of the day. Unfortunately, the weather took a stormy turn as the day drew to a close. About 10 kilometers before reaching the city, the surroundings took a less pleasant turn: old industrial warehouses, railways, and people living in tents along the canal's edge came into view. Crossing through Toulouse turned out to be a bit of a challenge, almost a nightmare. Finally arriving was a relief, and I was grateful that Loïc could host me. We spent some time playing car games and watching a couple of videos before I called it a night.

I set out from Loïc's place in the afternoon, wrapping up a wonderful weekend with him. I absorbed a wealth of knowledge and hold great respect for his grasp of technology. The cycleway running alongside the Canal du Midi was buzzing with activity. As I pedaled away from the city, traffic gradually dwindled. While the scenery didn't deviate much from what I'd seen before Toulouse, the interplay of light and the emergence of leaves on the trees added an extra touch of charm. After Castelnaudary, the pavement gave way to dirt tracks. My pace slowed, yet the journey remained quite manageable. My first glimpse of the Pyrenees and their snow-capped peaks left me utterly in awe. It was a breathtaking sight that served as a poignant reminder of the distance I'd covered from Nantes on my bike. This realization felt like an important milestone achieved on my journey.

The Cité de Carcassonne, is a medieval fortress dating back to the Gallo-Roman period. It was added to the UNESCO list of World Heritage Sites in 1997 because of the exceptional preservation and restoration of the medieval citadel.

The wind quieted down overnight, and clouds blanketed the sky, though thankfully, it wasn't humid. As I packed up my gear, I noticed several groups of soldiers passing by. I arrived in Carcassonne around noon, where I grabbed some groceries and took the time to explore the castle. I couldn't help but be taken aback by the absence of cycling lanes in the city and the steep 20% fee at the ATM. The city's maze of wrong turns had me feeling a bit impatient to move on. It took a bit of maneuvering to circle around the city via the Canal du Midi, but soon enough, it was in my rearview. Despite the persistent strong winds, I found myself captivated by the scenery, which had transformed into my envisioned Mediterranean landscape: pines, olive trees, cypresses, and the striking red and arid soil. A visit to a cemetery provided me with a source of water, marking my departure from the canal that had been my companion for several days. This marked a shift from the ease of riding I had grown accustomed to and also signaled my imminent departure from France.

Spotting the Pic de Nore on the horizon brought into perspective just how close Magali's place was. Similarly, following the canal could lead me to Adge and Nicole and Robert. While both options were enticing, I decided to keep them on hold for another time. As evening approached, I stumbled upon a spot to set up camp—a small hill nestled among vineyards and shaded by pine trees. The view stretched over the valley below, with the Montagne Noire in the distance. Given the weather, I opted not to use the rain cover. It struck me that, with a self-standing tent, I should take advantage of this option more frequently. My mind was occupied with thoughts of potentially leaving France for the Nordics. While the idea of departing once again from my friends and family seemed challenging, I acknowledged that I might ultimately let opportunities shape my destination. Amidst these reflections, I realized I might be overanalyzing things and perhaps, it was time to embrace the present moment and savor it to the fullest. Easier said than done, of course.

Spotting the Pic de Nore on the horizon brought into perspective just how close Magali's place was. Similarly, following the canal could lead me to Adge and Nicole and Robert. While both options were enticing, I decided to keep them on hold for another time. As evening approached, I stumbled upon a spot to set up camp—a small hill nestled among vineyards and shaded by pine trees. The view stretched over the valley below, with the Montagne Noire in the distance. Given the weather, I opted not to use the rain cover. It struck me that, with a self-standing tent, I should take advantage of this option more frequently. My mind was occupied with thoughts of potentially leaving France for the Nordics. While the idea of departing once again from my friends and family seemed challenging, I acknowledged that I might ultimately let opportunities shape my destination. Amidst these reflections, I realized I might be overanalyzing things and perhaps, it was time to embrace the present moment and savor it to the fullest. Easier said than done, of course.

Today marks the end of my first two weeks on the road. Tomorrow, I'll embark on the third week of my journey. As morning broke, I was greeted by an unexpected blanket of fog. Despite this, the tent remained mostly dry, courtesy of the protective pine tree above. Packing up my gear, I noticed two individuals beginning their work in the nearby vineyard. As I set off, they offered friendly greetings and inquired about my night's rest, which had been quite comfortable.

Before lunch, I tackled my initial ascents of the trip. Despite the less-than-optimal lighting conditions, the landscape held a captivating beauty. A pit stop in a small town allowed me to stock up on provisions before I commenced a route that led me through mountainous terrain. The panoramic vistas were truly breathtaking, yet the condition of the double tracks deteriorated significantly, becoming steep and rugged. Recognizing the need to cover some ground before day's end, I made the decision to redirect onto a road. Eventually, I descended to the lower plains after navigating through a canyon. From this vantage point, a solitary but impressive snow-capped peak caught my attention in the distance, the Canigou. With determination, I veered in its direction, or more accurately, embarked on a hike along some of the roughest tracks I've encountered thus far, in order to ascend to higher ground. There, I discovered a perfect spot beside a vineyard, affording me a panoramic view of the surrounding mountains and the snow-draped peak.

Today's cycling journey through such stunning landscapes, despite the challenges, left a deep impression on me. It served as a reminder that the forthcoming weeks are likely to present their own share of complexities. In certain moments, the lush greenery was so abundant that it was easy to forget it wasn't the heart of summer. The concept of the Greater Mediterranean Divide occupied my thoughts today—a route that could potentially extend all the way to Eastern Turkey. As I contemplated this idea, the notion of an ancient empire that once reigned over these lands crossed my mind, hinting at the possibility of naming the divide in its honor.

Much like the previous day, the sky remained veiled by clouds, concealing the mountain peaks from view. A tractor rumbled into the nearby field as I packed my gear, though it stayed on the opposite side, leaving me to my preparations. The paved descent into the valley provided an exhilarating ride, and to my surprise, the other side of the pass opened up into a remarkably flat and expansive terrain. My route took me through lush plains adorned with a variety of green leafy trees, making for an effortless journey. As the day unfolded, a twinge of concern crept in as I felt a more pronounced ache in my knee. This worry lingered in the background as I ventured to buy supplies and recharged my phone in the supermarket before setting my sights on Spain. Along the way, I caught sight of snow-capped peaks on the horizon. By late afternoon, I began the ascent toward the pass. The climb wasn't as demanding as I anticipated, and the scenery that unfolded around me was nothing short of awe-inspiring. The untouched forest enveloped me in its natural splendour.

A momentary misstep occurred when I took a wrong turn, mistakenly following the greenway. This led me to a quaint house adorned with solar panels and a meticulously kept garden—a testament, perhaps, to the residents' self-reliance. Quickly realizing my error, I retraced my path and embarked on an unpaved trail that led me all the way to the pass, marked by a modest barrier demarcating the boundary between France and Spain. Nestling my campsite right next to this marker, I decided to save the descent for the following day. Throughout the day, I noticed an itching sensation in my ears, possibly attributed to sunburn. In the evening, I found comfort in watching a couple of episodes of Friends, knowing that I have only a handful of episodes left to enjoy.
